

Atypical Clinical Guideline Utilization and Online Medical Direction
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1   ATYPICALGUIDELINEUTILIZATION& ONLINEMEDDIRECTION
Standard:
Provide direction on managing patients and circumstances whose needs are outside the guidelines.
Purpose:
Give direction for providers who encounter complicated, unusual, and atypical patient encounters
and to establish an orderly method by which these clinical issues can be rapidly addressed.
Application:
1) Clinical encounters requiring use of this guideline may be divided into two types:
a) Those whose clinical situation is covered by an existing guideline but are presenting a
clinical/administrative challenge and require non-medical control guidance
Examples: clarification of a COG, patient destination, other healthcare provider issues, etc.
and require non-medical control guidance
b) Those whose clinical situation is not covered by existing guideline and thus require medical
control orders via online medical consultation.
Examples: modification of drug dosage, patient medication not addressed in guideline or
unfamiliar to a provider, termination of resuscitation not covered in current policy.
2) Patients requiring online medical consultation (1b) shall contact medical control as described in
steps 4 and 5 below. The provider requesting online medical control must be on the scene with
the patient.
3) The first call for operational/clinical issues related to an individual patient or patients will be
placed to an organization’s designated clinical supervisory personnel (e.g., DMO).The call
should be placed via a recorded line through Communications. If the clinical supervisory
personnel are not available the call should be directed to the On-Call System Medical Director
via Communications on a recorded line.
4) If online medical control consultation is required or desired the request should be made to the
On-Call System Medical Directors.
a) If a System Medical Director is unable to be contacted then; a physician at the intended
receiving hospital may be used via recorded telephone line through Communications or
radio. If calling a hospital for online medical control; only physicians at receiving hospitals
can provide medical direction; other staff, including nurses, may not provide online medical
direction.
5) The name of the individual providing online medical control or administrative direction shall be
clearly documented in the narrative section of the PCR. This documentation shall include times,
names, and details of consultations made by the EMS provider.