

Confidentiality of Patient Information 
       CLINICAL OPERATING GUIDELINES CLINICAL STANDARD 
UPDATED 02.01.2021 (MD 20-14) PAGE 1 of 1 CONFIDENTIALITY OF PATIENT INFORMATION
Standard:
To establish system-wide standards for the protection of patient identity and/or health information,
include photographs and video records.
Definitions:
Health information: Any information possessed by a healthcare provider regarding a
patient’s medical history, mental or physical condition, treatment, or the specific circumstances
surrounding an identifiable incident.
Protected Health Information (PHI): Individually identifiable health information that is held
or transmitted in any form or medica, whether electronic, written, spoken, printed, digital,
recorded, or photographic, which can be linked to an individual or there is a reasonable basis to
believe it can be used to identify an individual.
Personally Identifiable Information (PII): Any information that can be used to distinguish or
trace an individual’s identity, either alone or when combined with other information. This includes
direct identifiers such as name or social security number, as well as indirect identifiers, including
date and place of birth.
Policy:
Persons receiving care from Austin-Travis County EMS System Providers have the right to expect
that their confidentiality will be reasonably preserved. Therefore:
a)   Providers shall not disclose medical information, images, or videos without first obtaining
authorization from the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative, except
when such disclosure is legally permitted or required by law.
b)   As a general rule, providers should limit their disclosure of PII and PHI to that which is
necessary for patient care.
c)   While on duty, providers may not utilize personal devices to record video or take
photographs of emergency incidents unless prior written authorization is obtained from
the Chief Medical Officer or their agency Administrator of Record.
a.   Any devices utilized to record video and/or photographs at emergency incidents
must comply with appropriate state and federal law.
d)   Any recordings taken during an emergency incident shall not be altered in any way and
must be made available to performance improvement staff and records retention
personnel if requested.
e)   Each agency should create a streamlined process for collecting and securing any video
and photographic data that is collected on emergency incidents.
This rule applies to all providers while on duty in the ATCEMS System. Additionally, providers are
responsible for ensuring that students, riders, etc. on their unit adhere to the same standards of
patient confidentiality and shall report breaches in confidentiality to their chain of command.