

Controlled Substance Tracking
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED06.01.2023 (MD 23-10)PAGE1 of 2CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TRACKING
Standard:
To establish minimum requirements for controlled substance ordering, storage, handling,
supplying, accounting, and documentation.
Purpose:
The purpose of this standard is to ensure accurate, timely, and complete reporting of the use,
expiration, and custody of controlled substances carried by credentialed providers in the EMS
system.
Application:
Each system agency that utilizes controlled substances must implement a tracking system that is
approved by the Chief Medical Officer. This system must be able to be audited on a regular basis,
as required by law, or more, at the request of the Chief Medical Officer.
Receipt of Shipment
Receipt of controlled substances from a shipper will require verification of the shipment by
two individuals prior to adding to that agencies stock. Once the shipment is verified, it should be
added to the tracking system.
Storage
Controlled substances will be stored in an area with a minimum of two locking mechanisms,
at least one of which may be a combination lock and one of which may be keyed (this may include
a vehicle lock). While on a shift, in the “pouch,” controlled substances must be stored either in an
area behind two locking mechanisms or on the person of a provider credentialed at the PL-5 level
or higher.
Verification
Master Inventory Safe
The safe must be audited at the beginning of each week by to approved individuals and
documented within the narcotics tracking system. No controlled substances may be issued while
the tracking system is being audited. Any time the safe is opened, existing counts must be verified
as well. If the count cannot be reconciled, the OCMO must be notified.
Custody change:
At shift change, or at other times, narcotics may need to change hands. Both providers
must acknowledge which specific narcotics are changing hands by referencing vial numbers.
Providers must document the date and time of this transaction in the narcotics tracking system. In
the event of a discrepancy, the OCMO must be notified.
Self-Audits:
Providers not subject to shift change must audit their narcotics with a witness every two
weeks. This must be logged in the tracker. In the event of a discrepancy, the OCMO must be
notified.
Administration:
Whenever narcotics are administered, they must be documented both on the patient care
report and in the narcotics tracker. The narcotics tracker must reference the incident or run
number. An indication must be documented, the amount administered, and the amount wasted, if
any, must be written in the tracker. The amount administered must match on both the tracker and
the patient care report. If any narcotics are wasted, a witness must witness the waste and sign. In

Controlled Substance Tracking
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED06.01.2023 (MD 23-10)PAGE2 of 2CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TRACKING
order of preference, witnesses to waste should be: another credentialed system provider, a
receiving nurse or physician, a TCOLE-certified law enforcement officer.