

Definition of a Patient
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 2DEFINITION OF APATIENT
Standard:
To establish guidelines for who meets the criteria to be considered a patient in the ATCEMS
System.
Purpose:
The definition of a patient is any individual person or third party who calls about an individual
person that:
•Has a complaint suggestive of potential illness or injury
•Requests evaluation for potential illness or injury
•Has obvious evidence of illness or injury
•Has experienced an acute event that could reasonably lead to illness or injury
•Is in a circumstance or situation that could reasonably lead to illness or injury
All individuals meeting any of the above criteria are considered “patients” in the ATCEMS System.
These criteria are intended to be considered in the broadest sense. The determination of an
individual’s status as a patient requires the input of both the individual and the Provider as well as
an assessment of the circumstances that led to the 9-1-1 call.
Clarification: A person of any age involved in an incident where there is minimal to no evidence of
injury potential (i.e. motor vehicle collision with minor damage) and, the person has no complaints
of injury or pain and, does not request a medical assessment and/or, did not request an EMS
response; may not be considered a patient as indicated in the definitions above. Thus, not subject
to requiring any further evaluation, assessment or PCR.
Application:
1) Anyone that fits the definition of a patient must be properly evaluated by a System credentialed
provider and appropriate treatment and transportation offered.
a) If a patient wishes to refuse offered treatment and/or transport Against Medical Advice
(AMA) refer to Refusal of Treatment or Transportation Standard and the Determination of
Capacity Standard.
2) Any adult that does not fit the definition of a patient as defined above does not require an
evaluation or, completion of a Patient Care Record and, may be designated as “no patient”(s).
Minors with an appropriate consenter on scene (defined in Clinical Standard on Refusal of
Treatment and/or Transport) or, who have the ability to consent as provided below may be
designated as “no patient (s)”. Minors, as defined below and without an appropriate
“consenter on scene”; must have refusal documentation completed on a PCR/ePCR and, may
not be designated as “no patient (s).” If there is any doubt; an individual should be deemed a
patient and an appropriate evaluation should be provided and documented in the PCR/ePCR. If
an individual meets the definition of a patient the following apply:
a) The definition of an adult is a person who is 18 years of age or older
i)  Adults have the right to consent to or refuse medical treatment
b) The definition of a minor is:
i)  A person under the age of 18 who is not and has never been married or who has not had
the disabilities of minority (emancipation) removed for general purposes by a court
(1) Generally, minors can neither consent to, nor refuse, medical treatment. Some
minors however, are considered to be emancipated and have the rights of
consent/refusal afforded an adult
ii) A minor is considered emancipated if he or she has obtained a court order of
emancipation from a Texas court. Minors may petition the court for emancipation if he
is:

Definition of a Patient
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE2 of 2DEFINITION OF APATIENT
(1) (i)A resident of Texas;(ii) 17 years of age or at least 16 years of age and living
separate from his parents, managing conservator or guardian;(iii) Is self-supporting
and managing his own financial affairs
c) In certain situations, a minor may consent to medical treatment without involvement of a
parent or legal guardian. A minor may consent to treatment if the minor:
i)  Is on active duty with the US armed services;
ii) Is 16 years or older residing separately from his parents or guardian and is managing
his own financial affairs (regardless of the source of income);
iii) Consents to diagnosis and treatment of any infectious/communicable disease with a
reporting requirement;
iv) Is unmarried and pregnant and consents to care related to the pregnancy, other than
abortion;
v) Consents to examination and treatment relating to drug or alcohol dependency;
vi) Is unmarried and has custody of their biological child, they may consent to treatment for
the child
d)  Pediatric guideline on the definition of a patient is:
i)  For the purpose of determining transport destination, any patient younger than 18 years
of age unless expressly stated in another guideline, standard or procedure. (e.g. Trauma
Transport Guidelines where it is defined as age <15 years)
ii) For the purpose of selecting appropriate treatment guideline, any patient < 37 kg or
who can be measured using a PEDIA Tape.