

Discontinuation of Prehospital Resuscitation
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED03.06.2025(MD25-02)PAGE1 of 2DISCONTINUATION OFPREHOSPITALRESUSCITATION
Standard:
Unsuccessful cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and other advanced life support (> PL4)
interventions may be discontinued prior to transport when this standard is followed as well as
utilization of the
Discontinuation of Prehospital Resuscitation checklist.
Purpose:
The purpose of this standard is to allow for the discontinuation of prehospital resuscitation after the
delivery of adequate and appropriate > PL4 therapy.
Application:
1. For cardiac arrest with ongoing resuscitation efforts > 30 minutes:
a. Inclusion Criteria:
i. Adequate CPR has been administered.
ii. Airway has been successfully managed with verification of device placement. Acceptable
management techniques include endotracheal intubation, BIAD, or cricothyrotomy.
iii. IV/IO access has been achieved.
iv. Rhythm-appropriate medications and defibrillations have been administered according to
appropriate clinical guidelines.
v. Ultrasound use, when available, to determine any cardiac motion.
vi. Credentialed providers on scene are in agreement with the decision to cease efforts.
vii. If all of the above are met, then the > PL5 provider will contact OLMC
viii. If you are presented with a valid DNR, see Exception Criteria below.
2. The > PL5 provider may contact OLMC for termination of Resuscitation (TOR) within <30
minutes of resuscitation based upon patient presentation, clinical circumstances, and their
clinical judgment, see
Criteria for Death or Withholding Resuscitation.
a. Providers should continue to resuscitate the following and transport after treatment
sensitive interventions have been performed on scene due to a higher likelihood of
resuscitation:
i. Cause of arrest is due to suspected hypothermia
ii. Sustained ROSC at any time during the resuscitation
iii. Persistently recurring or refractory ventricular fibrillation and/or pulseless tachycardia or
any continued neurologic activity – eye-opening or motor response.
iv. Ultrasound, when available, determines cardiac motion.
3. When OLMC is involved in the decision to terminate, then resuscitative efforts must continue
while:
a. The family is counseled on the patient’s unchanged condition and impending discontinuation
of efforts. If termination of efforts is anticipated, then Victim Services should be requested
as early as possible.
b. The > PL5 is requesting a TOR from OLMC.
4. Document all patient care and interactions with the patient’s family, personal physician, medical
examiner, law enforcement, and OLMC in the ePCR.
5. Providers should consider external factors such as the inability to secure the scene, cardiac
arrests in a public place, etc. when deciding whether to terminate efforts or transport. This
decision should be made in conjunction with law enforcement partners and OLMC.
6. Patients in the ambulance while resuscitation efforts are ongoing should be safely transported
to the hospital. Resuscitation should not be discontinued en route, nor should it be discontinued
and the patient removed from the ambulance. Very limited exceptions exist, and they are

Discontinuation of Prehospital Resuscitation
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED03.06.2025(MD25-02)PAGE2 of 2DISCONTINUATION OFPREHOSPITALRESUSCITATION
restricted to immediate life-saving management of another patient on the scene, for example,
during mass casualty incidents.
7. Following pronouncement, the body comes under the jurisdiction of the Medical Examiner and
should be treated according to the
Clinical Standard on Crime Scenes.
Exception Criteria:
If a valid out-of-hospital DNR is presented or found anytime during ongoing resuscitative attempts,
the Providers/Responders may immediately stop the resuscitation efforts, and a time of TOR may
be obtained from communications; see DNR and Advanced Directives for further information.