

Domestic Violence (≥ 18 years old)
(Partner and/or Elder Abuse)
Recognition and Reporting
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1  DOMESTICVIOLENCE(≥ 18Y/O) RECOGNITION& REPORTING
Standard:
Domestic violence is physical, sexual, emotional, coercive, or psychological abuse and/or
intimidation, which attempts to control another person in a current or former family, dating, or
household relationship. This includes suspected individuals being trafficked. Elder abuse is the
physical and/or mental injury, sexual abuse, negligent treatment, or maltreatment of a senior
citizen by another person. Abuse may be at the hands of a caregiver, spouse, neighbor, or adult
child of the patient. The recognition, appropriate reporting, and referral of abuse is a critical step
to improving patient safety , providing quality health care, and preventing further abuse. For
individuals < 18 years old Refer to Clinical Standard on Child Abuse Recognition and Reporting.
Purpose:
Assessment of an abuse case is based upon the following principles:
•    Protect the patient from harm.
•    Suspect that the patient may be a victim of abuse, especially if the injury/illness is not
consistent with the reported history.
•    Respect the privacy of the patient and family.
•    Collect and document as much information as possible.
Application:
1. Assess all patients for any psychological characteristics of abuse, including excessive
passivity, compliant or fearful behavior, excessive aggression, violent tendencies, excessive
crying, behavioral disorders, substance abuse, medical non-compliance, or repeated EMS
requests. This is typically best done in private with the patient.
2. Assess all patients for any physical signs of abuse, especially any injuries that are
inconsistent with the reported mechanism of injury. Defensive injuries (e.g. to forearms),
and injuries during pregnancy are also suggestive of abuse. Injuries in different stages of
healing may indicate repeated episodes of violence.
3. Assess all patients for signs and symptoms of neglect, including inappropriate level of
clothing for weather, inadequate hygiene, absence of attentive caregiver(s), or physical
signs of malnutrition.
4. System Credentialed Providers are required to immediately report any suspicious findings to
the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) hotline: 800-252-5400.
This phone is answered 24 hours every day. If the patient refuses, this should occur as soon
as reasonably possible after leaving the scene. If the patient is transported, then at the
hospital after patient transfer is completed. Providers may need to request a brief “out of
service time” for this process to be completed. Other than the phone interview, there are no
other immediate written documentation reporting requirements by the State.
5. If the patient is transported the hospital; the RN/MD receiving report should be advised of
the conditions/situation the patient was found in. Law Enforcement may also be notified if
available. These must be reported to the “Department” (DFPS). Reporting options are
additionally discussed including criterion for on-line reporting vs. hotline call; including,
creating an account and login to make the on-line report :
https://www.txabusehotline.org/Login/Default.aspx
6. All patient encounters with DFPS reporting must be documented in your PCR/ePCR with the
DFPS intake/case number included.
Reference:
Human Resources Code Title 2, Subtitle D, Chapter 48, Sec. 48.002 and 48.051
.