

Identification Badges
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 2IDENTIFICATIONBADGES
Standard:
Credential Badges are the property of the Office of the Chief Medical Officer and are valid only if
they are issued and maintained as designated by Clinical Standard(s) and as such, badges will not
be modified. It is the responsibility of System Provider Organizations to immediately collect and
return to the OCMO the badges of those individuals whose credentials have been revoked, or who
are no longer affiliated with the organization. In addition, any student, observer, or cadet must
visibly wear at all times a badge affixed to their upper torso that clearly identifies their role.
Purpose:
Due to the variety of providers with different levels of training an ID badge system is required to
ensure that everyone on scene, including the patient, knows the System-credential capabilities of
each Provider.
Application:
1. Proper identification of System Providers is required by the Texas Department of State
Health Services (TDSHS).
2. System identification badges serve as the primary identifier for System Credentialed
individuals as well as his/her Credential level. This however does not replace verbally
identifying self and team members along with credentials and role to each patient or
persons.
3. These badges are not intended for use as organization or department identification.
4. Proper identification of Providers will facilitate the exchange of patient information within
the guidelines established by Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
5. Badges should be visibly worn by any responder providing any level of patient care. The
exception would be when circumstances require the responder to utilize personal protective
outerwear (i.e. bunker gear, rain gear, etc.).
6. Badges are valid throughout the System and are not limited to specific venues or defined
response areas.
7. The OCMO ID badges include:
•Provider’s Picture
•Name
•Credential Level
•TDSHS Certification or Licensure Level
•TDSHS Certification or Licensure number
•Color coding denoting the appropriate credential level
8. Below is the color coding used to aid in identifying System Credential Level:
WhiteResponder with no System Medical Credentials
YellowProvider Level 1(PL 1)
BlueProvider Level 2(PL 2)
GreenProvider Level 3 (PL 3)
OrangeProvider Level 4(PL 4)
RedProvider Level 5(PL 5)
BlackProvider Level 6(PL 6)
PurplePhysician
Candidates that are transitioning to a higher credential level will wear the color badge
for the desired level of credential with the words “CANDIDATE” within the color
codin
gand above the OCMO LOGO
9. A system responder that is currently system credentialed, but without a badge, is at that
point functioning as a First Aid Provider. In cases where an individual is recognized and
known to be a currently credentialed provider in the System, the provider in charge of
patient care may, at their discretion, allow the individual to participate in patient care. The