

Inter-facility Transfers
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2022 (MD 22-01)PAGE1 of 1INTER-FACILITYTRANSFERS
Standard:
Establish guidance on Emergent inter-facility transfers (ETRAN).
Purpose:
To transport an emergent patient requiring Advanced Life Support care and continuous monitoring
during their transport from one medical facility to another.
Application:
1. The transporting paramedic should ensure that all appropriate documentation accompanies the
patient. Known STEMI or time dependent Stroke or Trauma patients are exceptions to this rule.
A memorandum of transfer (MOT) must be obtained (location/facility exceptions noted in CS –
19) but all other records may be faxed to the receiving facility if not presented at time of
transfer.
2. In the event a Transport Provider arrives at the transferring facility and; the patient is on a
pump, vent, receiving medication (s) not in the System COGs, or on a medical device not used
in the System; the Transport Provider must contact the on call System Medical Director.
3. When transporting hospital staff, both the transport crew and accompanying staff are
responsible for management of the patient.
4. All EMS rendered treatments must comply with the ATCEMS System Clinical Operating
Guidelines.
5. An ATCEMS patient care record will be completed in accordance with the Documentation of the
Patient Care Report Standard (Clinical Standard on Documentation of Vital Signs).
6. The following items are required system approved equipment for all transfers.
•Cardiac monitor/defibrillator
•Standard response bag
•Obstetrics kit (OB/GYN transfers only)
7. All patients that fall within the intent of this Standard should, at a minimum receive:
•Continuous ECG and oxygen saturation monitoring
•Non-invasive hemodynamic monitoring (auscultated blood pressure, palpated pulse rate)
8. If the patient deteriorates, the transferring facility should be notified via radio or cellular phone.
Additional orders if needed should be obtained from OLMC.