

Medication Administration Safety
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1MEDICATIONADMINISTRATIONSAFETY
Standard:
This standard establishes safe practices and uniform system procedures for the administration of
medications
Purpose:
To standardize the appropriate medication administration methods necessary to improve patient
safety and patient outcomes. The intention is to establish processes that will mitigate the likelihood
and impact of errors associated with medication administration by preventing the error from
occurring or preventing the error from reaching the patient.
Application:
1. All medications must be administered in accordance with this Clinical Standard using the
most current System Clinical Guidelines, References, and Procedures.
a. This standard applies to all system credentialed providers.
b. This standard applies to the administration of all medications unless specifically
exempted in other System Clinical Guidelines or Procedures.
2. Each response agency must ensure all System approved medication administration safety
tools are available to providers.
a. Individual providers must have immediate access to the medication safety tools.
b. A hard copy is preferred with additional access through other means including
electronic access. As a redundancy, an alternate method for accessing the safety tool
is required.
3. The Medication information in the Drug Formulary and the Medication Administration Safety
Procedure and Medication Safety Checklist contained in Clinical Procedure CP-02 must be
used each time a medication is administered to a patient.
a. The Medication Administration Safety procedure defines the methods designed to
ensure safe medication administration.
b. The Medication Administration Safety Checklist is used independently by a second
credentialed provider to verify critical information to minimize the likelihood of a
medication administration error.
c. The Medication Reference Tool is used to provide the critical information required
prior to medication administration. It does not replace the need for provider
knowledge of medications or the need for the medication information defined in the
Clinical Operating Guidelines.
d. The PediaTape device must be used to determine the estimated weight for all
pediatric patients, if a current and accurate weight is not available.
4. All details of medication administration and medication safety procedures must be
accurately and completely documented in the patient care record.