

MemorandumofTransfer(MOT)
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1MEMORANDUM OFTRANSFER(MOT)
Standard:
To establish the expectations that ATCEMS transporting crews will review the Memorandum of
Transfers (MOT) in order to transfer the patient to the appropriate receiving facility as ordered in
the MOT.
Purpose:
A Memorandum of Transfer (MOT) is a medical order written for the transfer of care of a patient
between one hospital to another hospital. The transport providers will honor the MOT unless there
is a deterioration in patient condition that necessitates transport to a closer facility for the purpose
of stabilization.
Application:
1)Ensure that there is an MOT for every patient that is being transferred from one hospital to
another that must include the name and signature of the sending physician, the name of a
receiving physician, and a destination that is an approved transport destination as outlined in
the COG’s. If the transport providers perceive a conflict with the existing ATCEMS destination
policy and the indicated destination this must be clarified with the sending physician or his
designee before transport is initiated.
2)Review the MOT to ensure the intended destination is listed on the MOT. If it is not indicated or
there is a change in destination this must be modified by the sending facility prior to transport.
The transport providers shall not modify or document on the MOT.
3)The patient is to be transported to the intended destination unless there is a change in the
patient status that can not be managed through existing ATCEMS treatment guidelines or
through contact with the sending/receiving physician. In such cases the provider may divert to
a closer appropriate facility for immediate stabilization. The reasons for diversion should be
thoroughly documented in the PCR.
4)Treat the patient in accordance with the COGs or medical orders provided by the transferring
physician. Providers must ensure that the orders from the transferring physician are within their
defined scope of practice according to the COGs.
5)Location/Facility exceptions to MOT Requirement are transfers from:
a)St David’s Bee Cave Satellite Emergency Department (SED) to St David’s South Austin
Medical Center
b)St David’s Pflugerville Satellite Emergency Department (SED) to St David’s North Austin
Medical Center
c)St David’s Cedar Park Satellite Emergency Department (SED) to St David’s Round Rock
Medical Center
d)Private Physicians Offices
e)Urgent Care Facilities
6)A patient with present mental capacity who has not had this capacity removed by physician or
court order and who is not in custody retains the rights of consent and refusal outlined in the
Refusal of Treatment/Transport Standard. If the patient wishes to refuse care or alter the
prescribed destination this should be discussed with the sending physician.