

Patient Safety
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1PATIENTSAFETY
Standard:
Provide general direction on equipment, clinical practices, and supplies that potentially impact
patient safety prior to or after patient care.
Purpose:
To minimize the likelihood of errors and patient harm as well as direction when encountering issues
concerning immediate supply shortages, equipment failures, and clinical issues.
Application:
1. For all Medication Administration refer to the medication dosing charts provided in the Drug
Formulary to determine and verify drug dosages.
2. For all Medication Administration perform and document a visual verification and Medication
Administration Cross Check.
3. Ensure that OCMO credentials are on your person and visible as required by DSHS.
4. At the beginning of each shift verify and document the presence of all required equipment,
medications, PPE and supplies.
5. If supplies fall below required levels, restock at the nearest appropriate location. If dispatched
to a call that may require depleted supplies, contact communications or your Command Staff.
6. If massive depletion of supplies (e.g., post-cardiac arrest) and/or contamination, remain out-of-
service until re-supplied and clean and contact communications or your Command Staff.
7. Medical Equipment that is System designated for multi-patient use, is “cleaned & disinfected’
according to manufacturer’s recommendations with an EPA approved product after each use.
8. Any patient care equipment (including single patient use disposables) that fails to function as it
was intended while managing a patient (equipment that fails while on a call, either preventing
its use on the patient or fails while attached to the patient) will be safely secured, removed
from service, and reported to the Office of the Chief Medical Officer (Clinical Procedure CP – 67)
and the Agency’s designated contact. This does not include medications or equipment failures
due to operator error.
9. Agencies maintain all medical equipment in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations
including: periodic testing, calibrations and/or recertifying.
10.If a near miss, clinical error, or adverse patient event occurs, contact your Agency’s designated
performance improvement person or their designee as indicated below once the error or
adverse event is identified.
a)  Notification Sequence:
i)  For clinical discussion or concerns related to the error or adverse event, contact the on
call System Medical Director immediately.
ii) For all other clinical errors, adverse events and near misses, notify the Agency’s
designated performance improvement person (DMO, FMO, etc.) as soon as possible via
email and/or cell phone. Mistakes happen during patient care and; it is important to
report those mistakes AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. Self-reporting is the cornerstone of our
Performance Improvement Program.
11.Transport Patients in accordance with Patient Transport Standards, Clinical Standard Safe
Transport of Patients, Clinical Standard Transport Destination Decision, Appendix Hospital
Transport Guidelines, and Clinical Reference Transport Grid.