

Patient Safety Event Reporting
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED12.01.2024 (MD 24-15)PAGE1 of 1PATIENTSAFETYEVENTREPORTING
Standard:
Provide general direction on reporting events to the System Clinical Quality Improvement team.
Intent:
As a public safety-based healthcare system, we must constantly pursue improvement
opportunities, which requires the commitment of all individuals within the system. Continuous
improvement consists of self-reporting whenever possible and providing direct constructive
feedback to colleagues to improve clinical care. Our system is stronger and safer when we are
accountable and committed to each other enough to provide open and honest feedback in our
pursuit of professional growth.
Application:
1. Receiving facilities, other healthcare providers, the public, and patients can report using
this system, and reporting should be encouraged. However, they are not required to report.
2. System providers must report all the events listed below immediately (as soon as possible) to
the on-duty Designated Medical Officer, Fire Medical Officer, or their agency’s patient safety
representative via telephone.
o  Medication or procedural errors that resulted in known or suspected patient harm
o  Equipment failures, malfunctions, or missing equipment that result in known or
suspected patient harm
o  Any patient injury that occurs while the patient is under the care of system providers
o  In-custody death
o  Unrecognized esophageal intubation
o  Provider impaired while on duty
o  Potentially avoidable patient injury while in EMS care
o  Practice outside of credentialed scope of practice
o  Disregarding/alteration of medical control orders
o  Any event where a suspected EMTALA violation occurs (If there is concern for clinical
impact, consult OLMC during transport)
3. System providers are required to report all the events listed below within 12 hours of the event
via telephone or written report to the appropriate patient safety representative:
o  Medication or procedural errors with the potential to result in patient harm
o  Equipment failures or malfunctions resulting in changes to patient care
o  Any care or therapy cannot be completed due to equipment malfunction or lack of
equipment availability
o  Any event or circumstance that is or shall be reported to another regulatory agency
(DSHS, DEA, etc.)
o  Any event where a franchise provider contacts 911 for a patient in their care
o  Any time a cardiac arrest happens in the presence of system providers
o  Concerns regarding the care provided by other healthcare providers, including:
  Other EMS agencies
  Fire Departments
  Nursing homes
  Physician’s offices
  Hospitals
4. System providers should report the events listed below via the online reporting form at their
earliest convenience:
o  Medication irregularities with no impact on patient care
o  Minor concerns regarding care provided by other healthcare providers
o  Irregularities in equipment function with no impact on patient care