

Patient Referral to Sobering Center
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED: 12.01.2024 (MD 24-15)PAGE1 of 1PATIENTREFERRALGUIDELINE FORSOBERINGCENTER
Standard:
To establish guidelines for referring individuals to the Sobering Center.
Purpose:
To establish criteria for ATCEMS referral of persons via an approved alternative transport and/or to
specialized healthcare resource(s) in order to facilitate more appropriate evaluation and care.
Application:
General Applicability:
1. Age > 18 years of age.
2. Under the influence of alcohol/drugs or experiencing withdrawal symptoms from alcohol/drugs
3. Does not require special precautions for infectious diseases.
4. Patient does not meet any alert criteria.
5. Will not require monitoring, re-evaluation of treatment, or ongoing treatment during transport.
6. No attempted overdose using an illicit drug or medication, prescription or over the counter.
Immediate Exclusion Criterion:
If the patient meets any exclusion criterion, then the patient must be transported to an Adult or
Pediatric ED per COG transport requirements.
1. Any patient with ongoing bleeding, wounds requiring repair, or suspected head injury.
2. Any acute neuro-focal changes.
3. Seizure within the last 24 hours
4. Assault within the last 24 hours
5. Complaint of chest pain or shortness of breath
6. Has been and/or is expected to be violent
7. Evidence of GI bleeding
8. Evidence of suicidal/homicidal ideation
9. Suicide attempt within the last 48 hours
10.Female of childbearing age with any of the following:
a. Localized abdominal pain
b. LMP > 12 weeks ago
c. Unusual or unexpected vaginal bleeding or discharge
Vital Sign Requirements:
a. Pulse: 50 – 110 bpm
b. Systolic BP: 90 – 180 mmHg
c. Respirations: 10 – 24 bpm
d. Blood Glucose: 60 – 300 mg/dL; no signs of DKA
e. SPO
2
≥92% on room air or prescribed supplemental oxygen
f.  Temperature < 102F
Minor superficial abrasions may be evaluated for underlying injury and dressed as needed by EMS.
If the individual meets General Applicability and Vital Sign Requirements, and none of
the Immediate Exclusion Criterion, then the patient may be referred to the Sobering
Center.