

Patient Referral Central Health Bridge Clinic
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED09.13.2024 (MD 24-09)PAGE1 of 2PATIENTREFERRAL TOCENTRALHEALTH
Standard:
To establish guidelines for referring individuals to the Central Health Bridge Clinic.
Purpose:
To establish criteria for ATCEMS referral of persons to an approved alternate primary/urgent care
resource to facilitate more appropriate evaluation and care.
Patient Selection:
General Applicability:
1. Able to provide EMS personnel with name, date of birth, gender, phone number if applicable,
and housing status or address
2. Currently enrolled in MAP or qualifies for MAP (unhoused patients qualify immediately)
3. Does not require special precautions for infectious diseases.
4. Does not meet any alert criteria.
5. Will not require monitoring, re-evaluation of treatment or ongoing treatment during transport.
Immediate Exclusion Criteria:
If the patient meets any exclusion criterion, then the patient may not be transported to this
resource:
1. Age <18 years
2. Cannot sit, stand, walk, and pivot.
3. Primary behavioral health impression
4. New fractures or suspected fractures
5. Acute alcohol or substance intoxication
Vital Sign Requirements:
1. Pulse: 60 – 110 bpm
2. Systolic BP: 90 – 200 mmHg
3. Respirations: 12 – 30 bpm
4. Blood Glucose: 70 – 300 mg/dL; no signs of DKA
5. SPO
2
≥ 93% on room air or prescribed supplemental oxygen
Circumstantial Evaluation, and all of these must apply:
1. Patient understands and follows commands.
2. Patient does not require physical restraint(s).
3. Patient is not in the custody of a peace officer.
4. A physician has not specifically requested ambulance transport.
If the patient has previous fractures that are already being treated (e.g. has a cast) or
has a previous psychiatric diagnosis but is cooperative and that is not the main reason
for transport, the patient should not be excluded.
Field Providers:
1. Perform complete assessment, physical exam, and diagnostics
2. Review patient selection criteria
3. Obtain patient consent to attempt this plan of care.
4. Determine appropriate clinical guideline(s), patient care plan based on complaint and
presentation.
5. Contact C4
6. Document interaction in ePCR, transport as appropriate, using Pulsara to contact clinic

Patient Referral Central Health Bridge Clinic
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED09.13.2024 (MD 24-09)PAGE2 of 2PATIENTREFERRAL TOCENTRALHEALTH
C4:
1. Screen for Patient selection criteria and ensure that clinic is able to take the patient
2. If questions arise as to the appropriateness of patient disposition, contact OLMC or clinic, as
appropriate
3. Document interaction and consult