

Request for Service by Individuals at a Hospital
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1    REQUEST FORSERVICE BYINDIVIDUALS AT AHOSPITAL
Purpose:
To provide a standardized response to individuals who are at a hospital facility capable of
evaluating and treating them who contact 911 for EMS transport to another hospital.
Application:
This clinical standard applies to individuals (not hospital staff) who are:
1. Calling from a Hospital facility, Psychiatric hospital, or Rehabilitation facility (waiting
room, emergency department, floor, physical building/grounds, or parking facility)–
AND-
2. Are currently registered to be evaluated-OR- have already been evaluated or
treated by the Emergency Department-OR- currently under the care of a hospital.
Process:
1. When a request for service is received by 911, EMS Communications Medics will process the
call in accordance with MPDS guidelines until it’s determined that the patient meets INPT5
criteria.
2. If it is determined that the caller meets any of the criteria described above, the call type
should be changed to Priority In-Patient Evaluation (INPT5) and the nearest EMS
Commander should be assigned to the call without a transport unit.
3. EMS Communications will then contact the Hospital Department Charge Nurse to advise that
a 911 call has been received from their facility and that an “EMS Commander” will be
enroute.
4. Upon arrival the Commander will locate, assess the patient, and confer with hospital staff.
5. If the patient meets the criteria above and, does not have a new or unaddressed complaint
the Commander should advise the patient to seek re-evaluation at the current Hospital or
Emergency Department. If the patient does not wish to do so the Commander may, at their
discretion, decline EMS transportation of the patient.
6. If the patient meets criteria above and, the Commander feels the patient would benefit from
EMS transport to a different hospital they may request a transport unit.
7. In all cases where patient contact is made by EMS personnel the assessment shall be
documented in the ePCR in accordance with prescribed standards.