

Transport Destination Decision
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 2STANDARDSPOLICY
Standard:
Define how a transport destination decision is reached, taking into consideration the specialized
care needs of specific conditions and the needs and preferences of our patients.
Purpose
Patients treated by the ATCEMS System may have complex clinical conditions that require care at
facilities with specialized capabilities or expertise in treating these conditions. In the absence of
the need for specialized care patients may want to be transported to facilities based on their
personal preference or the location of their physician and records. Whenever possible the
providers of the ATCEMS System will provide patients with transport to a prescribed medical facility
of their preference.
Application:
1. The following assumes the patient or the patient’s legal guardian has decision making
capacity in accordance with the Refusal of Treatment/Transportation Standard and the
Determination of Capacity Procedure. In the absence of decision making capacity or in cases
where consent is implied the patient should be transported to the closest appropriate facility.
If a patient wishes to refuse treatment/transport but has been determined to lack the
capacity to do so providers should consult their supervisor and online medical control in
accordance with the Refusal of Treatment/Transportation Standard.
2. When a patient presents with a clinical condition requiring specialized care the transporting
providers will transport the patient to the closest facility that offers the specialized care for
that patient’s condition. (STEMI, Stroke, Trauma, Resuscitation Center, Pediatric care, etc).
3. If a patient refuses to go to the recommended facility, transport providers will then explain
the benefit of transport to the recommended facility and the risk of transport to another
facility. If the patient still refuses transport to the recommended facility, transport providers
will then recommend transport to the next closest appropriate facility for their condition.
4. If a patient continues to refuse transport to the alternative specialty care facility or requests
transport to a facility that lacks the ability to care for the patient condition, the transport
provider will make every effort to explain the need for the specialty care facility. These
efforts may include but are not limited to contacting the patient’s physician, a supervisor, on-
call Medical Director or OLMC at the facility the patient wishes to be transported to.
5. If after the efforts described above the patient continues to request transport to a facility not
recommended for the patient’s condition the transport providers will transport the patient to
the facility of the patient’s choosing. They should notify their supervisor and the receiving
facility of their transport. On arrival at the facility the crew should consult with the attending
physician to determine if the patient will be transferred. If such a transfer is imminent the
provider should contact their supervisor and remain immediately available to transfer the
patient after the required screening examination by the receiving facility. The duration of this
availability is to be determined by the supervisor based on the patient’s condition and the
anticipated time to transfer.
6. If a patient does not have a condition that requires transport to a specialized facility as
prescribed by guideline, the providers will transport the patient to an approved system facility
of the patient’s choosing. When a patient requests transport to a facility other than an
approved system facility, the transport decision should be made in consultation with a
supervisor. If in the provider’s opinion the patient’s condition warrants transport to a closer
facility for rapid stabilization the need for this destination should be explained to the patient
and every effort made to deliver the patient to the closest appropriate facility. These efforts
may include but are not limited to contacting a supervisor or online medical control. If the

Transport Destination Decision
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE2 of 2STANDARDSPOLICY
patient continues to refuse the recommended destination the patient will be advised of the
associated risks and transported to the destination of their choosing.
7. If the patient has a memorandum of transfer or if transport has been arranged by another
healthcare provider the transport provider should transport the patient to the destination
indicated by the memorandum of transfer or sending healthcare provider in accordance with
the memorandum Standard.
8. If the patient does not have a condition that requires specialty care as prescribed by guideline
and does not have an expressed preference the transport provider may transport the patient
to the closest appropriate facility.
9. In the event multiple patients from the same event are to be transported in one unit the
patient with higher acuity determines the transport destination. Where the need for different
facilities can be anticipated reasonable efforts should be made to split the patients at the
scene as long as doing so does not place either patient in danger.
10.Any refusal of treatment or recommended transport destination should be performed and
documented in accordance with the Refusal of Treatment/Transport Standard and
Determination of Capacity Procedure.