

STEMI Alert
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1STEMI ALERT
Standard:
To establish guidelines for declaring a STEMI Alert and initiating patient transport to an appropriate
receiving facility based on COG transport guideline.
Purpose:
In order to more consistently assess and apply the notification for a STEMI Alert the following
criteria have been developed in conjunction with Regional Mission Lifeline initiative.
Application:
STEMI Alert Criteria:
1. A STEMI Alert should be called when a patient is currently symptomatic for an acute
coronary syndrome event, and
2. Has new or presumably new ST segment elevation > 1 mm in two anatomically contiguous
leads, and
3. Does not have exclusion criterion listed below.
4. If a patient meets STEMI Alert criteria and none of the exclusion and ACS consult criteria,
then a STEMI Alert should 1
st
be declared to communications. As soon as possible a 12-lead
ECG should be transmitted and whenever possible the patient’s name should accompany the
12-lead ECG.
5. The transport hospital should be notified of the STEMI Alert as soon as practical and the
alert must include the transport radio report to the hospital with the patient condition
information.
STEMI Alert Exclusions & ACS Consult Criteria:
1. Patients that are currently asymptomatic for an acute coronary syndrome event however
have ECG readings consistent with the above STEMI Alert criteria, or
2. Patients who are symptomatic for an acute coronary syndrome event and have evidence of
isolated V1 and V2 elevation only, LBBB or LVH, Early repolarization, Ventricular/Ventricular
Paced, Diffuse ST elevation, or Non-specific ST changes or other abnormal ECG findings
including poor ECG tracing.
The provider should not declare a STEMI Alert and should consult with the anticipated receiving
hospital prior to transport and transmit a 12 lead ECG with ACS Consult - Facility Name in the
patient ID field.
The declaration of the STEMI Alert or use of the ACS Consult option should be based upon the
patient’s current condition and the provider’s judgement.