

Stroke/LVOAlert
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED11.01.2021 (MD 21-13)PAGE1 of 1STROKE/ LVO ALERT
Standard:
To establish guidelines for declaring a Stroke or Large Vessel Occlusion (LVO) Alert and initiating
patient transport to an appropriate receiving facility based on COG transport guideline.
Purpose:
To outline the assessment of a patient currently exhibiting signs and/or symptoms associated with
stroke.
Application:
1. Initiate assessment and treatment of suspected stroke patients in accordance with most
appropriate clinical guideline(s).
2. Utilize Stroke Screening checklist.
3. Ascertain the last time the patient was seen normal to establish the time oflastknownwell.
4. Obtain a blood glucose level according to the blood glucose procedure.
5. Perform the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Screen (CPSS).
a. All portions of CPSS must be completed. Any abnormality in the screening is positive for
stroke.
6. If the has a positive CPSS, then assess for weakness and perform the Visual Disturbance,
Aphasia, and Neglect (VAN) Score.
a. If any portion of the VAN assessment is positive, then the patient is VAN positive. A
positive VAN Score & positive CPSS screening along with weakness is positive for a
LVO.
7. Declare the appropriate alert and identify the appropriate destination:
LVO AlertStroke Alert
Patient is positive for CPSS, also has
weakness, and
positive VAN Score
Patient is positive for CPSS but negative
VAN Score
Onset of symptoms or last known well time is < 23 hours & bloodglucose > 50
Transport to Thrombectomy Capable Stroke
Center
Transport to Primary or Thrombectomy
Ca
pable Stroke Centers
May transport to Primary Stroke Center (PSC) only if distance to Thrombectomy Capable
Stroke Center (TCSC) is > 15 minutes further.
For example: Scene to PSC is 5 minutes or 20 minutes to TCSC, then transport to TCSC.
Scene to PSC is 5 minutes or 21 minutes to TCSC
,then transport to PSC.
Any patient with stroke-like symptoms with onset > 23 hours should be transported to
the closest Stroke Center
Refer to Transport Guideline and Matrix As Needed
8. Whenever possible, identify a family member or historian to accompany the patient to the
hospital.
9. Tool to aid in capturing patient information for the receiving facility - #FILM
a. # - Unit Number
b. F – Family contact info
c. I – Recent Interventions (Surgeries, cardiac cath, etc.)
d. L – Last known well
e. M – Medication (specifically antiplatelet and anti-coagulant)