

Transfer of Care to Provider of Lesser Credentials
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED02.01.2021 (MD 20-14)PAGE1 of 1TRANSFER OFCARE TOPROVIDER OFLESSERCREDENTIALS
Standard:
To define circumstances and establish a process for transferring patient care from a higher
credentialed provider to one of lesser credentials.
Purpose:
Providers may be presented with multiple patients, limited resources, or patient conditions
requiring early rapid transport in order to maximize potential outcome (for example one
critically injured patient and multiple non-injured occupants in a motor-vehicle collision).
These situations may require that patients be left in the care of a lesser credentialed
provider. The ultimate decision of whether or not to initiate transport of a critically ill or
injured patient while awaiting additional resources rests with the on-scene Provider with the
most advanced level of system Credentials as defined in Authority for Patient Care.
Application:
When transferring care to a provider of lesser credentials the following applies:
1. Leaving patients on-scene should not be a routine procedure. It is to be considered
only when a patient requires immediate transport in order to maximize potential
outcome.
2. The transport Provider may transfer patient care to a Provider of lesser Credentialing
when transfer of established care is not beyond the scope and/or training of the
Provider(s) assuming care (i.e., an intubated patient may not be left with a System
PL 1, PL 2, PL 3, or PL 4 Credentialed Provider).
3. All patients should be accounted for, assessed and triaged, and appropriate
additional resources requested prior to transport of the critically injured patient.
4. No patient requiring immediate advanced stabilization (i.e., pleural decompression,
intubation, defibrillation etc.) is to be left on-scene awaiting additional resources
unless an appropriately credentialed and equipped Provider is present and able to
perform such care.
5. Mass and Multi-casualty incident transport decisions will be made by the on-scene
command structure.