

Transfer of Care to Provider From Another Agency
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED06.01.2023 (MD 23-10)PAGE1 of 1TRANSFER OFCARE TOOTHERAGENCY
Standard:
To define circumstances and establish a process for receiving and transferring patients from
one agency to another.
Purpose:
Providers may be presented with multiple patients, limited resources, or patient conditions
requiring transfer of care to a provider from another agency, such as: transferring care to
an aeromedical provider, a different transporting agency, another agency that will obtain a
patient refusal, etc.
The ultimate decision of whether or not to transfer care to a provider from another agency
shall be made following all established norms, Texas laws, and the Clinical Standard
regarding
On-Scene Authority of Patient Care. During Mass and Multi-casualty incident
situations, decisions will be made by the on-scene command structure.
Application:
When transferring care to a provider of a different agency:
•This decision must, above all, be patient-centered. Transferring care to another
agency must benefit the patient and, if possible, the EMS system.
•Patient care officially transfers from one provider to the other after an in-person
report, which should, at minimum, consist of the following, in MIST format:
o    Differential Diagnosis
oAge/Sex
oMechanism of Injury / Medical Complaint
oInjuries / Inspections – time of onset, brief medical exam & findings
oVital Signs – First set & significant changes
oTreatments and times
•Providers are encouraged and expected to continue to assist in patient care within
their scope of practice as needed by other agencies. This can include providing care
during transport, should the transporting agency express the need. The transporting
agency’s lead provider has authority over patient care and other providers should
assist them in their plan of care. If a significant disagreement arises, OLMC should
be contacted.
•Complete all documentation following the
Documentation of Patient Care Report
Clinical Standard.
•When a system-credentialed physician (PL-8) or advanced provider (PL-7) is on-
scene, providers should make allowances for them to inform clinical care across
agencies.