

Transport Decision Process
CLINICALOPERATINGGUIDELINESCLINICALSTANDARD
U
PDATED12.01.2024 (MD 24-15)PAGE1 of 1TRANSPORTDECISIONPROCESS
Purpose
To define a process for transferring care of patients to providers with credentialing levels ≤PL-4.
Application:
In
this standard, a > PL-5 refers to an ATCEMS credentialed > PL-5 with no current restrictions on their
credential to practice.
All providers on scene are expected toparticipate in patient care; the highest credentialed provider on
scene maintains ultimate responsibility for the patient's care and for ensuring that the patient is adequately
cared for en route to the destination. Stable patients not in need of > PL-5 level care may be attended by
another provider. A > PL5 must manage any “High-Risk Transport” patient as defined below:
1. Trauma Alert (Physiologic criteria)
2. Stroke Alert
3.   LVO Alert
4. STEMI alert
5.   Patients who have experienced syncope
Exception: Patients <50 years of age who return to normal baseline mental status,
have a normal ECG, do not have a complaint that otherwise meets High-Risk
Transport criteria, and no vital signs meet high-risk refusal criteria.
6.   Postictal seizure patients who have not returned to baseline mental status
7.   Patients who require additional or ongoing medication(s), intervention(s), and/or monitoring
beyond the scope of the ≤PL-4 as defined by the clinical operating guidelines.
8.   Patients who have received medications beyond the scope of practice of the ≤PL-4
provider.
Exceptions:
1. Patients who receive a single dose of Intranasal narcotic for pain
control of a traumatic injury that does not involve the head, neck,
chest, or abdomen.
2. Patients with only an IV saline lock
3. Patients receiving only monitored PO medications
4. Initially hypoglycemic patients who return to normal baseline
status after treatment and have no vital signs that meet high-risk
refusal criteria
9.   Patients who the on-scene providers do not agree can be safely transported without a ≥PL-5
attending in the patient compartment.
BLS Unit Application:
Any “High-Risk Transport” patient as defined above must be assessed by a ≥ PL-5 provider or
responder, if available. However, if a BLS unit has been dispatched to the scene and on-scene
providers determine that, although the patient meets the criteria for PL-5 evaluation/care, the
patient would receive significant clinical benefit from rapid transport to the nearest appropriate
facility and/or the patient would be significantly harmed by waiting on scene for a ≥PL-5, the BLS
unit may transport the patient to the nearest appropriate facility.
Documentation:
The ePCR should reflect the decision-making process to determine which provider attends to the
patient.