

Utilization of Video Laryngoscopy Recordings 
       CLINICAL OPERATING GUIDELINES CLINICAL STANDARD  
U
PDATED 03.06.2025 (MD 25-02) PAGE 1 of 1 UTILIZATION OF VIDEO RECORDINGS 
 
Purpose: 
To   establish a clear standard for the review, retention, and deletion of video laryngoscopy files 
obtained during patient care to support quality improvement, quality assurance, and training 
initiatives within the EMS system. 
 
Scope: 
This standard applies to all video files collected by system providers or system assets and is only 
superseded by applicable state and federal law. 
Application: 
Agency Responsibility 
• It is the responsibility of each agency with video laryngoscopy recording capability 
to provide a secure drive for uploading files. 
• This drive must be accessible only to designated agency QA/QI personnel (SCQIC 
subcommittee members), the Chief Medical Officer, and the Chief Medical Officer’s 
designee(s). 
Upload Process 
• All video laryngoscopy procedures must have the corresponding video file uploaded 
to the agency’s secure drive before the end of the provider’s shift. 
• Files must be clearly marked to ensure the correct file can be linked to each incident. 
Utilization 
• Video files are the property of the System Continuous Quality Improvement 
Committee and will only be used for the purposes outlined in this standard. 
Unauthorized use is strictly prohibited and is considered an integrity violation in 
accordance with the Credentialing Standard on Modification or Revocation of 
Credential to Practice. 
• Permitted uses: 
o Case Reviews: Confidential case reviews involving only the QA/QI team and 
providers directly involved in the respective patient care case. Full, unedited 
videos will not be shared with uninvolved individuals. 
o Quality Improvement Activities: Videos may be analyzed to identify trends, 
enhance system training, support research initiatives, and guide system 
performance improvement strategies. These videos should be edited and de-
identified. 
o Training: Videos may be retained for training purposes but must be edited to 
redact all protected health information (PHI) and crew identities via an approved 
process, requiring verification of the redaction by a designee of the Chief Medical 
Officer. 
Retention 
• Videos will be retained for 90 days to facilitate review and potential use for training. 
• Videos selected for training will be edited to remove PHI and personnel identifiers 
before being stored securely.  
• At 90 days, any videos not designated for training use or actively being used in a 
quality improvement review will be securely deleted. 
• Any video used in a quality improvement review retained past 90 days and not 
designated for training use will be deleted within 5 days of case closure. 
 
 