

Abdominal/Reproductive
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeyp7v
1. What makes up the abdominal cavity?: Everything included between the diaphragm to the
pelvis
2. What lines the abdominal cavity?: the parietal peritoneum
3. What major organs of concern are in the left upper quadrent?: Spleen, Stomach,
kidney
4. What major organs of concern are in the right upper quadrent?: Liver, gallbladder,
pancreas, kidney
5. What major organs of concern are in the right lower quadrent?: Appendix,
ovary/fallopian tube
6. What major organs of concern are in the left lower quadrent?: Descending colon,
left ovary/fallopian tube
7. Visceral pain: Less severe, more generalized dull/aching
8. Parietal pain: more severe, sharp, constant localized pain arising from the peritoneum.
9. What is referred pain?: Visceral pain that is felt somewhere other than the aected system
10. What are signs of peritonitis?: Positive markle test/heel jar, fever/chills, loss of appetite
11. Appendicitis rupture is more common among ages: 4 and under
12. What are signs of appendicitis: Pain radiating from the umbilicus to the RLQ, positive markle sign
13. What are signs of pancreatitis: Sharp and severe epigastric pain, Pain in love handles/naval (Grey
Turner and Cullens)
14. What are signs of cholecystitis?: RUQ pain/tenderness, belching, heartburn, intolerance to food.
15. What do the four F's refer to?: Cholecystitis
16. Where is Gastroenteritis commonly found?: In close communities, like nursing homes, day
cares, schools, andre stations
17. What are signs of gastroenteritis?: Dehydration from N/V and diarrhea, ABD pain, and fever
18. What are some causes of GI bleeding?: Ulcers, esophageal varices, diverticulosis.
19. What are signs of upper GI bleeding?: Hematemesis or Melana. Bright red bleeding
20. What are signs of lower GI Bleeding?: Hematochezia. Bright red bleeding
21. What is our blood resource most commonly used for?: GI Bleeds
22. What are high risk factors for esophageal varices?: Alcohol Abuse and Liver Disease
23. What are some signs of Esophageal Varices?: Large amounts of bright red hematemesis,
shock signs, rapid pulse
24. What are some signs of ulcers?: Sudden onset of pain with a burning/gnawing sensation
1 / 3

Abdominal/Reproductive
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeyp7v
25. What are hernias associated with?: Increased pressure in the abdominal cavity
26. What are signs of AAA: Gradual onset of lumbar, groin, and abdominal pain, and then a severe sudden
onset of pain in the lower back,ank, or pelvic. Often described as tearing
27. What arefindings unique to AAA?: Absent or decreased pulses below the pelvis, pale cool
clammy cyanotic skin in the legs. Pulsating mass
28. Abdominal pain lasting more than ____ hours is an emergency: 6
29. What arefindings unique to sickle cell?: Ulcers on legs, pale skin, blood feels like its "stabbing"
the patient, priapism, sudden blindness in one eye
30. Abdominal pain in women of childbearing age should be treated as ______
until proven otherwise: ectopic pregnancy
31. What are signs of ovarian cysts?: Tenderness and severe pain, pain during intercourse or bowel
movements.
32. What is the most common cause of endometritis?: retained products of conception after
miscarriage or abortion
33. What are signs of endometritis?: Pain/tenderness, fever, abdominal distention, bleeding/dis-
charge, discomfort during bowel movements
34. What arefindings unique to PID: Abnormal discharge color/odor, pain during intercourse,
irregular bleeding/cramping
35. What are signs of Endometriosis?: Dysmenorrhea, bleeding, pain during intercourse/bowel
movements
36. What patient populations are at risk for UTI's?: Elderly women, diabetics, immobilized
patients, patients with catheters.
37. What are S/S of a uti?: Blood in urine, cloudy urine with strong odor, pain/burning during intercourse,
frequent need to urinate, fever
38. Who is at risk for kidney stones?: Men ages 20-50, and patients with a history of dehydration
and family history of kidney stones
39. What are S/S of kidney stones?: Severe pain, groin/ank pain, pain with urination, urge to urinate,
fever/chills
40. Acute renal failure occurs over a period of: days, may be reversible
41. Chronic kidney failure occurs over: years, requires dialysis or transplant
42. What are leading causes of kidney failure?: Diabetes/Hypertension
43. What are the 2 types of dialysis?: Hemodialysis, Peritoneal Dialysis
2 / 3

Abdominal/Reproductive
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeyp7v
44. What are important questions to ask for a patient on dialysis?: Ask for the patients
dry weight, dialysis schedule, and how muchuid was taken o
45. What is the most common type of catheter?: Foley catheter
46. What are some general guidelines for managing a patient with a catheter?-
: Draining the bag before transport, keeping the bag lower than the patient to allow for drainage. Note and document
any unusualndings
3 / 3