

Airway Management for ATCEMS
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jbei8k
1. What are critical airway red flags?: AMS with secretions, The inability to speak full sentences, 
Stridor/silent chest, Recurrent vomiting, Rising C02, Increased work of breathing, Declining mental status.
2. What 3 things should you assess when assessing ventilations?: Rate, Rhythm, and 
Quality
3. What is the purpose of an initial airway assessment?: To find and treat immediate life 
threats
4. What is an example of having a mental model for airway intervention?: PACE 
Framework
5. How do we manage a Foreign Body Occlusion in an 
UNCONSCIOUS patient?: If the patient is unconscious, immediately begin CPR., and check the airway 
after each CPR rotation. Never blind finger sweep
6. How do we manage a Foreign Body Occlusion in a CONSCIOUS Patient?: For 
adults, begin 5 abdominal chest thrusts.
For pediactrics, hold the patient down and provide 5 back blows with the lower palm of your hand, then turn the 
patient over, and begin 5 downward chest thrusts.
7. What is complicated about ventilating a patient with an unsupported 
head/upper back?: The airway is sitting at an "L" Shape, making ventilations less adequate.
8. How should we position the airway to provide adequate ventilation?: Place 
padding/Support the patients head/upper back to bring the ear to the sternal notch. This creates a much more 
"straight" path for airflow
9. How do we apply suction at ATCEMS?: Using a DuCanto catheter, we suction no more than 10-15 
seconds, ventilating between attempts.
10. What indicates the use of an OPA?: An unconscious patient without a gag reflex.
11. What indicates the use of an NPA?: A semi conscious patient that might have a gag reflex.
12. What contraindicates an NPA/OPA?: Facial fractures for NPA, and Mandible/mouth trauma for 
OPA
13. What are some S/S of an impending airway failure?: An increased work of breathing 
(Retractions, Accessory muscle use), Tripoding, Headbobbing, Change in mental status, Signs of fatigue, Stridor/Gur-
gling, and Hypoxia/Hypercarbia.
14. Why don't we use PEEP in cardiac arrest?: PEEP will increase intrathoracic pressure, putting 
stress on the vena cava, and increasing preload.
1 / 3

Airway Management for ATCEMS
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jbei8k
15. What is the ATCEMS Gold Standard for securing an adequate BVM seal?: A 
two handed clamp
16. What is the IGel?: A Blind Insertion Airway Device (BIAD) that is sized based off the patients weight. The 
IGel allows for a suction catheter channel, and isolates the larynx from the pharynx.
17. What are some pearls of the IGel?: Using downward pressure to position the device. Always 
preload the IGel with a G tube, and never use the ET tamer.
18. What is the PACE plan?: An airway acronym that plans for a Primary, Alternate, Contingent, and 
Emergent airway treatment.
19. What is EtC02 and the two components that make up EtC02?: EtC02 is the amount 
of C02 that is expired during expiration. It is composed of ventilation and perfusion.
20. An aerobic metabolism produces ATP efficiently with the Prescence of: Oxygen
21. An anaerobic metabolism produces little ATP without oxygen, and allows 
for: Lactic Acid buildup
22. C02 will diffuse from the blood into the alveolar space via: Diffusion, from an area 
with a low concentration to an area with a high concentration
23. Anytime an advanced airway is in place, we monitor with an: Entidal
24. What can capnography monitor?: Directly and immediately monitors ventilation. Indirectly mon-
itors perfusion and metabolism. Can show patient trends.
25. What is the difference between capnometry and capnography?: Capnometry 
measures a numerical value, while capnography is able to measure real time via a graph, and numerical values.
26. What does a bronchospastic waveform look like?: Sharkfins >ˆ
27. What are S/S of breathstacking?: An incomplete exhalation phase, a rising capnography baseline, 
Increased intrathoracic pressure, Increased risk of barotrauma.
28. What pneumonic can we use to troubleshoot our airway intervention?: DOPE
Displacement (Recheck tube placement)
Obstruction (Suction error?)
Pneumothorax (Auscultate lungs)
Equipment (Is my equipment accurately placed/functional?)
29. What is a normal EtC02 value?: 35-45 mmHg
30. What is a hypercapnic EtC02 reading?: 45+ mmHg
31. What is a hypocapnic EtC02 reading?: <35 mmHg
32. What can a spike in EtC02 indicate during CPR?: ROSC
2 / 3

Airway Management for ATCEMS
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jbei8k
33. Mental status is closely related to...: Airway Status
34. Upper airway concerns often originate from...: Patency
35. Lower airway concerns often originate from...: Ventilation/oxygenation problems
36. What separates the upper and lower airway?: The larynx
3 / 3