

Respiratory
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeo7ou
1. What makes up the upper airway?: The larynx and up
2. What makes up the lower airway?: The pharynx and below
3. What is surfactant?: a substance in the alveoli that reduces surface tension, makes gas exchange easier,
and prevents atelectasis.
4. What is our primary respiratory center?: Medulla Oblongata
5. Where are chemoreceptors, and what do they detect?: Primary chemoreceptors in the
medulla oblongata, primarily triggered by H+
6. What is diusion?: Movement of a solute from a high to a low concentration.
7. Where is the phrenic nerve?: C3-C5
8. Describe Inhalation: An active process where the diaphragm contracts expanding the chest cavity.
Negative pressure will force the air to rush in.
9. What is the primary trigger for respiration?: Increased CO2, Increased H+, decreased Ph.
10. Describe exhalation: A passive process where the muscles relax and recoil air out of the lungs. Positive
pressure forces air out of the chest cavity.
11. What core muscles are activated during inspiration?: Diaphragm, external intercostals
12. What core muscles are activated during expiration?: Diaphragm, internal intercostals
13. What accessory muscles are activated during inspiration?: Sternocleidomastoid,
Pectoralis Major
14. What accessory muscles are activated during expiration?: Abdominal muscles,
quadratus lumborum
15. What is paradoxical breathing?: abnormal breathing where the chest and abdomen move in
opposite directions. When the diaphragm is weakened, the abdomen will move inward during inspiration, and
outward during expiration
16. Ventilation is mainly aected by...: Tidal volume and rate
17. Oxygenation is mainly aected by...: FiO2 and PEEP
18. What is tidal volume?: Amount of air in each breath
19. What is minute volume?: Tidal volume x RR. the total amount of air inhaled or exhaled from a person's
lungs in one minute
20. Dead Space: volume of inhaled air that does not participate in gas exchange
21. Residual Volume: Remaining air after max exhalation
22. V/Q mismatch: A mismatch between Ventilation and Perfusion. (Adequate ventilation, poor perfusion) (PE)
23. What is the best indicator of declining respiratory status?: Mental Status
1 / 3

Respiratory
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeo7ou
24. What does rhonchi often represent: thick obstructions/sectretions
25. What do rales/crackles often represent: Fluid/secretions in airway
26. What 3 things make up athsma?: Bronchospasm, Bronchoedema, and Bronchorrhea.
Smooth muscle constriction, inammation, and hypersecretion of mucus via goblet cells.
27. What can we use to treat athsma?: O2, CPAP, Bronchodilation, Ipratropium, and nebulized epi.
28. How long does albuterol last compares to epi when nebulized?: Albuterol can last
for 3-6 hours when nebulized, while epi can last about 30 minutes.
29. What is our starting PEEP for Asthma and CPAP?: Starting peep at 5
30. Can we use a nebulizer in CPAP?: Yes
31. What causes COPD?: Irritation/Inammation due to chronic exposure to irritants (smoking #1)
32. How is alveoli aected by COPD?: Alveoli face irreversible destruction of Alveolar walls and
capillary beds, leading to a loss of surface area for gas exchange, and a loss of elastic recoil.
33. Someone presenting with purse lip breathing, pink skin, and diminished
lung sounds might be suering from...: Emphysema
34. How are bronchioles aected by COPD?: Chronic inammation leads to a remodeling of the
Bronchioles, causingbrosis, Smooth muscle hypertrophy, and goblet cell hypertrophy
35. A patient presenting with a productive cough, cyanotic appearance, and
edema in legs might be suering from: Chronic Bronchitis
36. How do we treat COPD?: 02, CPAP splinting, Bronchodilation, Anticholinergic, position of comfort.
37. CPAP _____ Intrathoracic Pressure: Increases
38. How can a patient benet from PEEP?: PEEP increases surface area for gas exchange, leaving
the lungs partially inated and re expanding atelectasis.
39. What are contraindications of CPAP?: Hypoperfusion, Pneumothorax, Facial trauma, AMS/LOC,
Respiratory arrest
40. A patient presenting with Vomiting, hypotension, and severe SOB/Wheez-
ing might be suering from...: Anaphylaxis
41. What is anaphylaxis?: A life threatening allergic reaction eecting 2 or more body systems.
42. What are our 3 main Inammatory Mediators?: Histamine, Leukotrienes, Cytokines
43. How can we treat anaphylaxis: Epinephrine, Benadryl, Albuterol.
44. What are acute causes of CHF?: Myocardial Ischemia, Myocarditis
45. What are chronic causes of CHF: Hypertension, Valvular Disease
2 / 3

Respiratory
Study online at https://quizlet.com/_jeo7ou
46. If we have left sided heart failure, where will our blood back up?: The left atrium,
and then eventually the pulmonary system
47. If we have right sided heart failure, where will our blood back up?: Right Atrium,
Vena Cava, and eventually our venous system
48. What 3 things can most commonly exacerbate CHF?: Diet Changes 48%
Non Compliance with medication 28%
New prescription 15%
49. What is the eect of Increasing Sodium levels?: An increase in circulating volume
50. What is an eect of increased circulating volume?: Increased Preload
51. How does CHF and RAAS relate?: The kidney will release renin to improve SVR, increasing
circulating volume, backinguid into the pulmonary system, and causing pulmonary hypertensionuid shifts into
the alveoli
52. What is treatment for CHF?: Nitroglycerin, CPAP
53. What is NTG mechanism of action?: NTG is converted into nitric oxide. Nitric oxide acts as a
potent vasodilator.
54. How is angiotensin II dierent from NTG?: Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction by de-
creasing Nitric Oxide production
55. A patient presenting with Fever, Isolated Rhonchi, and SOB may be suer-
ing from?: Pneumonia
56. A tripoding child presenting with fever, drooling, and a hoarse voice may be
suering from: Epiglottitis
57. How can we help treat Epiglottitis?: Blow by O2 with Saline Nebulizer, early ALS, calming the
patient.
58. A patient presenting with Stridor on inspiration, and a seal like bark may be
suering from: Croup
59. How can we treat croup?: Nebulized Saline or Epi, O2, calming the patient
60. Why is RSV life threatening for Infants?: Causes Apnea and Lethargy
61. What is virchows triad?: Venous Statis
Endothelial Injury
Hypercoagulability
62. What are signs of Hyperventilation?: Numbness around lips, carpopedal spams, dizziness, chest
pain.
3 / 3