How long do you have to complete a patient care record/report (PCR)? 
Under what circumstances may the medical director revoke a credential to practice as noted in the COGs? Be able to explain each of these in some detail. 
Explain when you would utilize the atypical clinical guideline and online medical direction
Under what circumstances can a provider cancel or alter a response?
Explain specifics related to cardiac arrest documentation
Explain what you will do if the patient is obviously deceased when you arrive
Discuss crime scene management (found under Cardiac Arrest Documentation)
Can we cover a decedent with a blanket from their home (hint: no)
Explain under what circumstances we must report abuse and/or neglect
Explain the process we would follow to report abuse and/or neglect
Explain how you would document suspected child (or any age) abuse
There are four guiding principles regarding the assessment and treatment of the abused child, be able to list and discuss. 
What is child abuse? 
Explain general crime scene principles
Under what circumstances would we withhold resuscitation?
Under what circumstances can a BLS provider contact communications for a Time of Death (TOD)?
What is the definition of a patient? 
Explain what “Against Medical Advice” (AMA) means
Who is a minor in the State of Texas, and why is this important?
Under what circumstances can a minor accept or refuse treatment/transport?
What is “emancipation”?
Describe the criteria for a pediatric patient
Under what circumstances can a provider discontinue prehospital resuscitation?
Explain the guideline related to Out of Hospital DNRs (OOHDNR)
Under what circumstances do we NOT honor an OOHDNR?
Under what circumstances can a DNR be overridden? 
Under what circumstances must you complete a PCR?
How do you document if you are cancelled prior to arrival?
How do you document if you do not make patient contact?
What should be included in a PCR?
How would you document if an indicated and appropriate assessment, intervention, or action prescribed by the COGs did NOT occur? 
What is included in a “complete set of vital signs”? 
Under what circumstances would you also include pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO2, and ECG monitoring? 
Why should the first blood pressure be manual? 
Describe the standard and purpose of the domestic violence partner and/or elder abuse COG. 
Explain how you would report this
Are you required to wear your credential badges on scene?  Why/why not? 
Explain what happens if a provider provides care that they are not credentialed to perform. 
Discuss the process of medical cross-check and why it’s a patient safety process. 
What must be documented regarding medication administration and medication safety procedures?
What equipment/medications must be IMMEDIATELY available at the patient’s bedside at your PL level? 
Discuss the application of the on-scene authority for patient care clinical standard
Discuss the circumstantial evaluation for a patient you are considering referring to an ATU, MCOT, or psychiatric ED
Discuss, in some detail, the patient safety standard. 
What MUST be reported as a patient safety event? 
A physician arrives on the scene. What must he/she present to participate in patient care? 
A physician on scene is asking you to do something that is outside your scope. What do you do?
What is an “intervener physician,” and what options does this person have if they wish to participate in patient care? 
Explain implied consent.
Explain informed consent/refusal
What is substituted (surrogate) consent? 
Explain, in some detail, application of the refusal of treatment and/or transport standard. 
What things must you consider if a patient with capacity wishes to refuse care? 
What documentation needs to be included for a patient who wants to refuse care? 
Describe how you would perform CPSS and VAN assessments.
Why must you get a blood glucose before calling a stroke alert? 
Briefly discuss the System Performance Improvement standard and your part in it. 
Can someone with a PL4 or higher transfer patient care to you?  If yes, under what circumstances?